Amazon RDS Proxy is a fully managed, highly available database proxy for Amazon Relational Database Service (RDS) that makes applications more scalable, more resilient to database failures, and more secure. One of the advantages that RDS Proxy provides in terms of connection handling is connection multiplexing, where the proxy uses a smaller set of database connections to process requests from a larger number of client connections. This multiplexing is performed using transactions as the unit of granularity, which means that the proxy executes different transactions from the same client session on different database connections to achieve the desired multiplexing benefits. When connecting directly to the DB instance endpoint, the max_connections value is imposed as the connection limit and any client will not be able to make new connections if that limit is reached. However, when the proxy was used, it handled a larger number of client connections and multiplexed them over the limited number of database connections so that pgbench was able to make more connections than the limit imposed by the RDS instance, and the database still received the limited number of connections from the proxy. This way, RDS Proxy can help scale applications and also prevent receiving 'Too many connections' errors from the database.

Here are a few scenarios where using an RDS Proxy with PostgreSQL can be particularly useful:

Managing many simultaneous connections: Applications that open and close database connections at a high rate can cause a significant load on the database server. By reusing database connections, RDS Proxy can enhance the performance of your application and significantly reduce the load on the database server.

Scaling with Serverless applications: If you use AWS Lambda for your applications, it can create numerous simultaneous connections to your database when your application scales out. These connections can overwhelm your database and affect its ability to service requests. With RDS Proxy, you can ensure that your serverless applications can scale without affecting the performance of your database.

Improving application availability: If your application depends on a single database connection, it can be affected if that connection is interrupted for any reason. RDS Proxy maintains a pool of established connections to your RDS instances, improving your application's ability to recover from database failures and interruptions.

Securing data in transit: RDS Proxy automatically uses SSL for connections to RDS databases and IAM authentication, allowing credentials for your database to be managed by AWS Secrets Manager and AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM).

Saving costs: Since the proxy manages and reuses connections, you might not need as many resources on the actual database, potentially lowering costs.

There may be cases where transactions on a client session rely on state information from previous requests, due to which it would no longer be safe to execute transactions across different database cnonections. This results in a decrease in multiplexing on the proxy. A simple example for this is a session variable or configuration parameter that is set on session initialization to be used by all transactions for that session/request.

In such cases, the proxy decides to pin the client connection to a specific DB connection with the changed state as it may be required for future transactions, and the proxy can enter a state known as pinning. When RDS Proxy processes requests to change session variables or configuration settings, it pins that session to the DB connection.
Pinning can reduce the efficiency of connection re-use on the proxy and under heavy load can also cause the application to see longer connection establishment times, connection timeouts and even 'Too many connections' errors in some cases. Review your application code and make sure that there are no pinning statements being used in order to get the maximum performance advantages of RDS Proxy.

Before implementing RDS Proxy, keep in mind the additional latency it might introduce due to an extra network hop. For applications that require minimal latency, this might be a factor to consider.
